# jParsec in a Nutshell

Languages obviously play a central role in computing. We express our ideas and
our algorithms in programming languages and all of them operate on data, that
too is often in a kind of language. 

So it comes to no surprise that processing of a language is an important task.
Most people probably know RegEx (if not, read about them!), but most languages
[can not be parsed this way](http://stackoverflow.com/a/1732454), so one comes
to look for other tools.

One such tool is [jParsec](jparsec.codehaus.org), which is a port of the
excellent [Parsec](http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Parsec) library for
Java. In this article, I'll show a small example
application ([full code](examples/TuringParser)).

## What is jParsec?

jParsec is basically a bunch of handy parsers that already know how to parse
certain things (like a identifier for example). But if that was all, we could
never build a new language to parse, so there are also ways to combinate them.
Further it is not only interesting to know, if a string is a valid program,
but ideally, we'd like to have a handy representation of it too, so jParsec
allows that as well.

jParsec can
- Parse common things like integers, identifiers (an alphanumeric name without
  whitespaces in between), ...
- Combine two or more parsers to a new one. For example, we could parse an
  integer _or_ an identifier.
- Process the parsed expressions to new types.

## The Project

So for fun, lets invent a programming language: the [Turing
Machine](http://introcs.cs.princeton.edu/java/74turing/)! Ok, not exactly
novel, but I have yet to see a file type for it...

A Turing Machine description needs basically

- A start state
- Some end states
- and transitions that describe
  - what is read
  - what the current state is and infer
  - what is written
  - what the new state is.
  - in what direction the head moves.

So I propose the following:
- `:end` designates an end state called "end"
- `>start` designates a start state called "start"
- `a t1 => b t2 L` designates a transition that assumes that the machine is in
  the state `a`, reads the character `t1` and then outputs `t2` and transfers
  into the state `b`, moving the read/write-head to the left (`N` would say
  that the head does not move and `R` would be right).
- Every such expression is on a separate line.

For example

    >even
    :evenEnd
    :oddEnd
    even o => odd o R
    odd o  => even o R
    even x => evenEnd x N
    odd x  => oddEnd x N

would be a turing machine that answers whether a tape has an even or odd
number of "o" characters on it.

We could of course use RegEx to parse this, but where would be the fun in
that?

## Fun as in Functional

An important thing to keep in mind in jParsec is that you *never* write a
parser! All you can do is combining existing parsers. You could imagine that
you don't program how to read a file, but instead generate an assembly line
that takes a file and twists and turns it until it has the form you need.

Another thing is, that `Parser`s have an output type. A
`Parser<TuringMachine>` is a parser that takes a string and twists and turns
it until it is a `TuringMachine`.

## Building the Assembly Line

So, how to go about this? Well, obviously we move through the file `char` by
`char` and whenever we see a `'>'` we change to "start state mode" and store
the next characters in an `identifierBuffer` and if we are not in any other
mode and see an alphanumeric character like in an identifier we move to
"transition mode" and... 

*Stop right there!*

Beginner programmers often start out thinking imperatively - to this, than do
that - but I think sooner or later one has to find out that it is often much
easier to start with a big problem and [break it down bit by bit][decomp].
[decomp]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decomposition_(computer_science)
"Functional Decomposition"

So we don't say what we do, but instead what we know. 

We do know, that a turing machine is just a parsed text.

    public static void main(String[] args) {
		Parser<TuringMachine> parser = generate();
		TuringMachine tm = parser.parse(example);
    	tm.run();
    	System.out.println(tm);
    }

We do also know, that a complete turing machine description has a list
expressions separated by newlines.

	Parser<List<Expression>> expParser = expression()
    			.sepBy(Scanners.string("\n"));

here
- `expression()` will be a parser for a single expression, but I didn't write
  it yet, but ignore that for a while.
- `expression().sepBy(...)` means that we get a bunch of expressions separated
  by `...`
- `Scanners.string("\n")` matches the literal newline.

combine that and you have "some expressions (as defined in `expression()`)
separated by the literal newline".

## Interpreting Results
Now the problem is that we have a `Parser<List<Expression>>` and not a
`Parser<TuringMachine>` - we would say we have a machine that turns a string
into a bunch of `Expression`s, but we did not combine them to a turing machine
yet. 

*To transform `Parser<A>` to `Parser<B>` one needs `.map(...)`*

In our case we need to *map* a `List<Expression>` to a `TuringMachine`. Assume
we wrote a method `TuringMachine compileTuringMachine(List<Expression> exps)`
(this is not really point of this article, now is it?), we could do

    Parser<TuringMachine> turingparser = expParser.map(new org.codehaus.jparsec.functors.Map<List<Expression>, TuringMachine>() {
    		public TuringMachine map(List<Expression> arg0) {
    			try {
    				return compileTuringMachine(arg0);
    			} catch (ParsingError e) {
    				System.err.println("Parse error");
    				return null;
    			}
    		}});

This looks difficult, but it just uses an [anonymous inner class](http://www.tek-tips.com/faqs.cfm?fid=1849) to transform the list.

What is `org.codehaus.jparsec.functors.Map<List<Expression>, TuringMachine>`?
It is jParsec's way to say "here comes a function that converts
`List<Expression>` to `TuringMachine`s. 

*In your own `Map<A,B>` you have to write a method `B map(A)`, and you have
`Parser<B> = Parser<A>.map(Map<A,B>)`.*

You will need this a lot, so be sure you understand this. On the other hand,
this also means, that there are lots of other examples of `map` later on.

## All Expressions are not alike

Until now, we delayed to think, what `expression()` is. An expression is
either

- an end state
- a start state
- or a transition

We could of course make the difference in the `map` function, but that would
be more than annoying, we'd much rather have some way to express that "either...or"...

Here is where the combinators of jParsec come into play, namely the
`Parsers.or` combinator. The informal description directly translates to

    private static Parser<Expression> expression() {
    	return Parsers.or(endstate(), startstate(), transition());
    }
 
When parsing, you will get the result of the first parser that is can act on
your string.

Question now is, how do we parse an `endstate()`? It's quite easy, we *first
have a ":", then we have an identifier*. In jParsec, there is the combinator
`sequence` which returns the result of the *last* working parser, but only,
after the others did their job (this means, that their result is ignored in
terms of return value, but they are necessary to match the string).

    private static Parser<Endstate> endstate() {
    	return Parsers
    			.sequence(Scanners.isChar(':'), Scanners.IDENTIFIER)
    			.map(new org.codehaus.jparsec.functors.Map<String, Endstate>() {
    		public Endstate map(String arg0) {
    			return new Endstate(arg0);
    		}
    	});
    }

So first we need to match `Scanners.isChar(':')` and *only if that worked*, we
read and return the `Scanners.IDENTIFIER`. It should not surprise you, that we
need another `map` here: `Scanners.IDENTIFIER` is a `Parser<String>`, but we
need a `Parser<Endstate>`, so we `map` `String` to `Endstate`.

As an exercise, you can implement the `startstate()` method yourself.

## The case of `transition()`

Transition is a bit more difficult, because we have something like `a b => c d
L` and need to remember `a`, `b`, `c`, `d`, and the direction as well. Again,
let us split it up a little. on the left hand site, we basically have the
current state of the read head and on the right side we have the output. In
the middle we have whitespaces and `"=>"`.

So lets first take a look at `readhead()`, which defines the lefthand side of
the transition (in the example it would be `a b`).

*In jParsec, you can use `Parsers.tuple(...)` to remember the return values of
all subparsers.*

It will also be important to acknowledge the whitespaces between the names,
so...

*The `Parser<A>.many()` method gives a list of many matches of `Parser<A>`
(possibly none at all), `Parser<A>.many1()` ensures, that `Parser<A>` has
matched at least once.*

    private static Parser<ReadHead> readhead() {
    	return Parsers
    			.tuple(Scanners.IDENTIFIER, Scanners.WHITESPACES.many1(), Scanners.IDENTIFIER)
    			.map(new org.codehaus.jparsec.functors.Map<Tuple3<String, List<Void>, String>, ReadHead>() {
    				public ReadHead map(Tuple3<String, List<Void>, String> arg0) {
    					return new ReadHead(arg0.a, arg0.c);
    				}
    			});
    }

Lets read that: "a readhead is an identifier, then some whitespaces (at least
one), and then another identifier". Here I used tuple, but also caught the
whitespaces in the middle. You notice, that they give a `List<Void>`, so
basically nothing at all. The different parts of the match in `Tuple[N]` are
called `.a`, `.b`, ..., so `ReadHead(arg0.a, arg0.c)` means "take the first
and third match, ignore the middle (which is whitespaces anyway).

Now it should come as little surprise, that we can implement `transition()` by


    private static Parser<Transition> transition() {
    	return Parsers.tuple(
    				readhead(),
    				Scanners.WHITESPACES.many1(), 
    				Scanners.string("=>"),
    				Scanners.WHITESPACES.many1(), 
    				output())
    			.map(new org.codehaus.jparsec.functors.Map<Tuple5<ReadHead, List<Void>,Void,List<Void>, Output>, Transition>() {
    		public Transition map(Tuple5<ReadHead, List<Void>,Void,List<Void>, Output> arg0) {
    			return new Transition(arg0.a, arg0.e);
    		}
    	});
    }

except maybe that `Scanners.string` does not return anything.

You can try to write the `output()` yourself.

## Summary

You can use primitive parsers such as
- `Scanner.IDENTIFIER`
- `Scanner.WHITESPACES`
- `Scanner.INTEGER`
- ...

to parse common thing.

You can combine Parsers by
- `Parsers.or`
- `Parsers.sequence`

or extend a single parser with
- `Parser<A>.many()`

You can transform

- a `Parser<A>` to `Parser<B>` by `Parser<A>.map(new Map<A,B>() { /* transform an A to a B */ })`
